Anónimo
Austrian Presidential Election

Presidential elections were held in Austria on 24 April 2016, with a second round run-off on 22 May 2016.[1] However, the results of the second round were annulled and a re-vote took place on 4 December 2016.[2][3]

The President of Austria is directly elected by universal adult suffrage once every six years. The election is held under a two-round system; if no candidate receives more than 50% of votes cast in the first round, then a second ballot occurs in which only those two candidates who received the greatest number of votes in the first round may stand. The constitution grants the president the power to appoint the Chancellor and, by extension, federal cabinet ministers, Supreme Court justices, military officers, and most major bureaucrats. The president may dissolve the National Council. In practice, however, the president acts as a figurehead.

Incumbent president Heinz Fischer had served two terms and was not eligible to be elected for a third successive term. In the first round of the election, Norbert Hofer of the Freedom Party of Austria received the most votes. Alexander Van der Bellen, a member of the Austrian Greens contesting as an independent, placed second. The candidates of the two governing parties, the Social Democratic and Austrian People's parties, placed fourth and fifth respectively, behind independent Irmgard Griss in third place. Since no candidate received a majority of the vote, Hofer and Van der Bellen went head-to-head in the second round in May. This was the first time since the Second World War that an Austrian president had not been backed by either the People's or the Social Democratic party.[4] During the run-off, Van der Bellen defeated Hofer on 23 May 2016 after the postal ballots were counted.[5]

On 1 July, the results of the second round of voting were annulled after the results in 20 of the 117 administrative districts were challenged, and the Constitutional Court of Austria found that Austrian electoral law had been disregarded in 14 of them. The Court found that over 77,900 absentee votes were improperly counted too early, however without any indication of votes having been fraudulently manipulated.[6] The second round re-vote was planned on 2 October, but was postponed to 4 December 2016.[2][3]

In a very reliable prognosis on the late evening of 4 December 2016, Alexander Van der Bellen was in the lead with 53.3% of votes with Norbert Hofer second with 46.7% of the votes. The voter turnout is estimated to be 74.1%.[7] Final results still stand out as a small amount of total votes (postal voting ballot papers) may not be counted before 5 December 2016. Traditionally FPÖ turnout in postal voting is significantly lower than their share of the ballot-box votes.

However, when it was apparent that the result was beyond doubt soon after the polls closed, Hofer conceded the race to Van der Bellen on the afternoon of 4 December.[8]
